
Citation
========

-   Study name: k2id-soep 

-   Label: K²ID-SOEP extension study 

-   Citation guideline: Researchers working with the K²ID-SOEP extension study
    are obligated to mention their use of the data within their publication,
    e.g., in the acknowledgements, by using the following reference: 

    “This paper uses data from the K²ID-SOEP extension study (doi:
    10.5684/k2id-soep-2013-15/v1). The K²ID-SOEP extension study was funded by
    the Jacobs Foundation.”

    In addition, all publications based on the K²ID-SOEP extension study are
    required to cite the following reference:

    Pia S. Schober, C. Katharina Spieß, Juliane F. Stahl, Gundula Zoch and
    Georg F. Camehl (2017): "The Early Childhood Education and Care Quality in
    the Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP-ECEC Quality) Study - K²ID-SOEP Data”, Data
    Documentation 91, Berlin: DIW Berlin.

-   Persistent identifier: 10.5684/k2id-soep-2013-15/v1 

-   Investigators/authors 

    -   Pia S. Schober, C. Katharina Spieß (PIs of the project)  

    -   Further researchers: Juliane F. Stahl, Georg F. Camehl 

-   URL: [http://www.k2id.de/](http://www.k2id.de/) 


Study info
==========

In the context of the recent expansion of child care places in early
childhood education and care (ECEC) institutions for children below
three years of age as well as increasing availability of full-day care
also for children aged three years and older in Germany, the study
gathered unique data on provision and access to ECEC quality. This was
accomplished by carrying out surveys which can be linked to the
Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP). The K²ID-SOEP extension study (short: K²ID)
was realized between 2013 and 2015. K²ID is an acronym for ‘Kinder und
Kitas In Deutschland’ (‘children and daycare centers in Germany), the
official name used in communications with survey respondents. K²ID
encompasses two surveys, the Parent Survey and the Institution Survey.
In a first step, the project surveyed parents of all SOEP children below
school age to investigate the parental decision making process and
subjective evaluations with respect to ECEC quality of the institutions
attended by their children. In a second step, data on the ECEC
institutions attended by these children were gathered from directors and
group educators of the ECEC institutions. These data include various
quality indicators, primarily indicators of structural and orientation
quality.

Method
======

Data collector: Kantar TNS (formerly TNS Infratest Sozialforschung).

Population: Private households with a child under school age in Germany.

Gross sample and data collection: The gross sample consisted of all
households with children born on 1 September 2007 or later that
participated in the 2013 wave of the Socio-Economic Panel or the
'Families in Germany' study and did not refuse survey participation for
2014 from the outset. Data collection started in October 2013 and
continued throughout 2014 as the ECEC institutions used by the surveyed
households were questioned (‘wave 1’). Sampling and data collection was
postponed by one year with respect to sample M, a newly added subsample
consisting of households with a migration background (‘wave 2’ in
2014/2015).

The K²ID Parent Survey and the K²ID Institution Survey were set up by
the project team. This involved developing a set of pretested
questionnaires for the main caregiver (‘Hauptbetreuungsperson’) in each
household as well as for the director and at least one educator within
each of the ECEC institutions attended by the children of the respective
households. Main caregivers and ECEC institutions were interviewed by
self-administered paper questionnaires first. To ensure high response
rates, households received several reminders by phone and from
interviewers as part of the regular SOEP survey. In case of
non-response, institutions were contacted via telephone. Directors had
the possibility to answer a highly compressed questionnaire combining
questions from both the director and educator questionnaires in order to
increase sample sizes.

Overall, the gross sample amounts to 3,065 households with 3,916
children. All households were asked to complete the Parent Survey for
each child falling in the required age range. Among other things, the
questionnaire served to gather the address of ECEC institutions used by
the surveyed households. Almost three in four households took part in
the survey, and for about 93 percent of children attending ECEC
institutions, parents reported the institution's address. This resulted
in a gross sample of 1,528 ECEC institutions whose staff was
subsequently invited to participate in the ECEC Institution Survey.
Ultimately, information on a total of 989 ECEC groups in 854 ECEC
institutions was collected, equating to a response rate of about 56
percent.

For more details, see our [Data
Documentation](http://www.diw.de/sixcms/detail.php?id=diw_01.c.561228.de).

Data access
===========

A scientific use file of the [K2ID-SOEP
data](http://www.diw.de/en/diw_01.c.564661.en/soep_k2id_soep_2013_15/v1.html)
will be made available after the end of the project. Users can obtain access
via the [Research Data Center of the
SOEP](https://www.diw.de/en/diw_02.c.242211.en/criteria_fdz_soep.html)
(Socio-Economic Panel Study). Only registered SOEP users are allowed to use
data from the K2ID-SOEP extension study. When requesting access to the SOEP,
users may indicate if they wish to receive the K²ID-SOEP data. For more
information, please contact [Michaela Engelmann](mailto:soepmail@diw.de) or the
principal investigators of the study, Professor C. Katharina Spiess and
Professor [Pia Schober](mailto:pia.schober@uni-tuebingen.de).

Data description
================

The K²ID data set is delivered in four different files: a Parent file, a
Director file, an Educator file and a Brutto file. The dataset
'k2id\_parent.dta' contains all data from the K²ID Parent Survey
(K²ID-SOEP extension study). The main purpose of this survey from
2013/2014 was to supplement the Socio-Economic Panel (including
'Families in Germany' study) with information on child care in general
and in particular on the ECEC institutions used by families with a child
between 0 and 6 years of age. The dataset includes data on 2836 children
from 2224 households. The dataset 'k2id\_director.dta' contains all data
from the K²ID Institution Survey (K²ID-SOEP extension study) referring
to the ECEC institution attended by one or several children from the
Socio-Economic Panel. The dataset also includes data from the highly
compressed version of the questionnaire. The survey from 2014/2015
gathered detailed information on the quality of the institution by
questioning the institution's director. The dataset includes data on 824
unique institutions. The dataset 'k2id\_educator.dta' contains all data
from the K²ID Institution Survey (K²ID-SOEP extension study) referring
to a specific group within the ECEC institution attended by one or
several children from the Socio-Economic Panel. The survey from
2014/2015 gathered detailed information on the quality of the group. The
respondent was usually the main group educator or, in the case of the
compressed questionnaire version, the institution's director. The
dataset includes data on 857 different groups. The dataset
'k2id\_brutto.dta' supplements all other datasets from the K²ID-SOEP
extension study with metadata (e.g., subsample, weights, information on
data collection, federal state). It contains the gross sample, i.e., all
children whose families were invited to participate in the study’s
pretest or main survey (N=4108 children). For 1,080 of these children,
there is data on their ECEC settings (851 institutions, 994 ECEC groups)
available.

Missing codes:

  ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  -1   No answer
       
  -2   Does not apply
       
  -3   After intensive checks a given value was found to be implausible and was finally deleted (to be interpreted like -1)
       
       Question not included in version of questionnaire
       
  -5    
       
       
  ---- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The identifiers hhnrakt (current household ID), persnr (child ID) and
parnr (parent ID) can be used together with the variable welle (survey
year based on which the gross sample of households was constructed) to
add data from the Socio-Economic Panel. The identifiers kitaid
(institution ID) and kigrid (group ID) serve to match information from
the Institution Survey.

Other material and Notes
========================

Georg F. Camehl, Pia S. Schober, and C. Katharina Spieß (2015) "A
SOEP-Related Study: Early Childhood Education and Care Quality in the
Socio-Economic Panel (K2ID-SOEP)", in: Sandra Gerstorf, Jürgen Schupp
(Eds.) „SOEP Wave Report 2014“, Berlin: DIW Berlin / SOEP, pp. 31-34

Pia S. Schober, C. Katharina Spieß, and Yvonne Anders (2014) "Early
childhood education and care quality: Investigating socio-economic
selection, child development and information asymmetries", in: Jacobs
Foundation, Annual Report 2013

For more information on publications, please consult the websites of
[Pia S.
Schober](http://www.uni-tuebingen.de/en/faculties/economics-and-social-sciences/subjects/department-of-sociology/department/faculty-staff-by-function/prof-pia-s-schober/publications.html)
and [C. Katharina
Spieß](http://www.diw.de/de/diw_01.c.10944.de/ueber_uns/menschen_am_diw_berlin/spiess_c_katharina.html).
